# Naive Teens

Aarfa rushed to the washroom.

She couldn’t hold back her tears sitting in the classroom any longer. She ignored the history teacher calling her back.

As soon as she locked the door from inside, she let her tears flow. *“How can Radhika change like that?”* the question occupied her mind. Just a week ago, they were inseparable. They were best friends.

Both 15-year old, Aarfa and Radhika had sat next to each other in the classroom every day for over 3 years. Being the most popular pair in their junior-high-school class, they made other girls jealous of getting all the attention from the boys. Every week or so, another boy in the class would get a crush on one of these two. They’d exchange these ‘new crush’ stories with each other & laughed together on how silly & corny boys were.

Both lived in the Parel neighborhood of Mumbai. They went shopping for their make-up supplies together and watched MTV. They were inseparable.

It was not the same today. The school had reopened today after 6 days. This morning, Radhika avoided Aarfa, sat in a different spot, with another girl, Tina. When Aarfa went to her & asked why she is acting so differently, Radhika gave an unusual hostile look. Aarfa didn’t stop asking her until Radhika finally gave her a reply. It was a loud & stern “Stay away from me!”.

The last week had changed Mumbai. There is tension in the air of Mumbai in schools & neighborhoods. The markets & railway stations are almost empty. The bustle of the city has been killed by the Hindu-Muslim riots of last week.

Aarfa remembered the images she saw watching the news last afternoon. The images of hate & destruction had shaken her from within.

A knock on the door of the washroom breaks her chain of thought. She quickly wiped the tears off her cheeks with a tissue. Her makeup is a mess. She tries to fix it quickly when she hears another knock. She opens the door & walks out. It’s Tina, the girl sitting next to Radhika today.

Tina expresses her sympathy “Are you okay ?”

“Why is Radhika like that today? ” Aarfa’s sobs slipped out.

Tina holds Aarfa’s shoulder & blurts out in a lower voice. “Her father was killed by a gang of Muslim rioters in his shop two days ago.”

“What ?”Aarfa is shaking.

“They even burned his grocery shop before stabbing him to death. She told me she hates Muslims.”

Her knees are giving up. Aarfa slides her back down the hallway wall and sits on the floor. Trying to grasp the floor and what she has just heard, she knows her world has been ripped apart.

Tina helps her stand up and they walk back to the classroom. To distract her mind off Radhika, she asks Aarfa if she’s preparing for her morning assembly speech for ‘Republic Day’ two weeks later for which she has been selected this year. She shakes her head in a no.

On two more tries by Aarfa before the end of school hours, Radhika avoids her. It’s a sunny afternoon in early January 1994. Aarfa as soon as she reaches home tired & disheartened, collapses onto her living room sofa & puts the TV on. She finds solace in her favorite show on MTV. The host, a bubbly young woman Sheraj Treasurywala, reads the fan mail with the childlike surprise & excitement. Most of the time, fan mails describe teenage life with its special highs & lows.

One line from a letter today catches her attention. “Are we a Hindu or a Muslim first or an Indian first? ”. It was sent by a 17-year old fan of the show living in Mumbai who had witnessed the horrendous violence of religious riots of last week. She watches the show for another 20 mins, switches to a music channel. Without any conscious effort, she dozes off on the sofa.

…

Aarfa paces outside her home, waiting for the school bus. It has been 12 days since Radhika has not spoken to her. She has not been able to settle on the topic for her Republic Day speech. It has to be something related to our nation. Should she write an ‘essay speech’ listing all the facts & achievements in India since it became an independent Republic in 1950? Would that be inspiring for her fellow students? She is not sure. She keeps digging in her brain on finding the right topic. The bus is here. She boards.

She keeps looking at the window with all the markets & shops passing by. The gruel aftermath of what happened last week was still visible on the streets. *“Are we a Hindu, a Muslim first or an Indian first? ”,* this line rings loud in her mind. She decides she will write her speech on this.

…

Standing backstage, Aarfa prepares herself for going out there. There are parents, students, teachers & school staff, nearly 2000 people sitting in the audience & they’ll lend her their eager ears within a few minutes. She has been on stage once before for a choreographed group dance but this is the first time she’ll go on a stage with nearly 2000 people listening to what she has to say. She is nervous.

She paces around, trying to calm herself down & focus on what she has to say. She hears the announcer calling her name & inviting her on stage. She takes a deep breath and walks out in the spotlight accompanied by applause from the audience.

“Happy Republic Day, to all of you!”, she speaks out after standing silent for 10 seconds in front of the microphone. The audience cheers with a jest.

“I want to ask all of you a simple question.” Aarfa continues. “Who among you is a Hindu ?, Please raise your hand.” The audience looks puzzled. She could hear the collective mesh of whispers. “If you’re a Hindu, please raise your hand. That’s all I ask.” Hands started rising in the air. Within a few seconds, more than half the audience had their hands risen.

“Thank you. You can put your hands down. Now I ask, If you’re a Muslim, please raise your hand. ” Far lesser hands are visible in the air now.

“Okay, you can put your hands down.”

“You have already heard of India’s countless achievements from other speeches today. So I will instead talk about what India has not achieved yet. Something in the soul of our city died this month. I don’t see my neighborhood friends come out to play in the streets anymore. My mother tells me I can’t go to my favorite sweets market because there are too many Hindus in that street.”

There is a serious silence. The air becomes tense. She could not hear anything except her voice. Her teachers & classmates in the audience including Radhika are all looking at her. She swallows a gulp of pain.

“The violence of last week didn’t just rip apart our shops & houses. It ripped apart my world. My best-friend..” she pauses for a brief second,

“…My best friend whose life is devastated by this violence now sees me as a Muslim first. I’m Muslim, She is Hindu. We are not best friends anymore. But I keep asking myself, Aren’t we the same as before, what has changed? Many of you must think of yourself as a Hindu or a Muslim above everything else but does that come from what we have in common? “

“Are you a Hindu, a Muslim first or Are you an Indian first ?” Someone starts clapping in the audience. She takes a pause. A dozen others join in the applause. The sound of the applause dies in a few seconds. Whispers grow louder & some of the parents' faces look angry. Some of them have already started walking out. She holds her composure & pushes ahead.

“Our country & Our city has accomplished extraordinary things within a few decades of our Independence. But do our achievements make us any prouder if we can’t think of ourselves as an Indian first and foremost? ” She takes a deep breath before her final line.

“That’s the question that has been bugging me & that’s all I wanted to say to you today.” The applause this time breaks out louder. The faces in the audience hold mixed reactions but almost all are clapping. She gracefully holds a forced smile & receives the applause.

Leaving behind the applause & chatter, she walks out of the spotlight, towards the backstage. She walks the empty hallway away from the stage towards the main gate. She still feels the pain of their broken friendship in her heart but she has at least found the relief of speaking it out. She looks up & sees Radhika a few meters in front of her, crying with an unending stream of tears rolling down her cheek. “Radha, are you okay?” she rushes towards Radhika and asks, holding her by her left arm. Radhika could only mutter sobs which got louder, “I’m sorry, Aarfa!”. She lets herself to be held by Aarfa.

Aarfa couldn’t find any words while Radhika keeps sobbing “I’m sorry! I don’t know what I was thinking. I was so mean to you.” Aarfa just holds her in her arms & tells her to stop crying. She wipes her tears while Radhika regains her composure.

“How about we go to our favorite Jalebi Shop in Parel after school today and you pay? That’s the only way you can bribe me to forgive you.” Radhika lets out a childish smile. Her eyes are now glimmering again.

“Okay let’s get there right now then.” Radhika holds her hand & they walk out of the gate.